

PC/monitor, version 1.4


A program that monitors availability of network services, keeping a
display that shows which are currently responding and which are not.

Usage:

     monitor filename

PC/monitor reads the control file "filename" to determine the list of
services to be monitored.  It then tests each service in the list.
Following each such test it displays the name of the host of that
service in a form that indicates the outcome of the test.  After
completing a round of tests, PC/monitor waits for 60 seconds, then
performs another round of tests.  An asterisk on the display indicates
which service is currently being tested.

Whenever a service responds normally, PC/monitor displays the host's
name using normal display mode.  If a service that responded on the
previous test fails to respond, PC/monitor displays the host's name in
intensified mode.  If two or more successive tests of a service fail,
PC/monitor changes the display of that host's name to blinking
intensified mode, and sounds an audible alarm once.  The user can
acknowledge having seen such a warning by hitting the space bar, which
causes PC/monitor to change currently blinking names to normal
intensity on the next round of tests.

If the service responds but the response is incorrect, its host's name
is underlined (or on a color monitor, in blue).

PC/monitor switches off all debugging switches just before it starts
to display test results.  If it notices some error while trying to
invoke a service, it displays the host's name in inverse video.

To stop the tests and exit from PC/monitor, type "q".  To start
another round of tests without waiting for completion of the 60-second
timeout , type "g".

PC/monitor can test the following kinds of services:

    1.  UDP time service.  PC/monitor sends a standard time service
	request and watches for a time response from that server.  It
	does not check the value of the result.

    2.  UDP domain name service.  PC/monitor sends a domain name
	service	request	for a name specified in the input file.  It
	checks the response to verify that it is the one expected.

    3.  UDP name service (IEN-116).  PC/monitor sends an old-style name
	service	request for a name specified in the input file.  It does
	not check value of the response.  (N.B.  Both name service and
	domain name service test results appear in the same column of
	the display.)

    4.  ICMP echo service.  PC/monitor sends a standard echo request
	containing 20 bytes of random data, and watches for an echo
	response containing those 20 bytes of random data.

    5.  RVD-control service.  PC/monitor sends a shutdown control
	request with the password "x" (in anticipation that "x"
	is not the maintenance password) and watches for a
	response from that server, but does not check that response
	for correctness.



Control file

The format of the control file is as follows:

1) The file is ASCII, so it may be prepared with an ordinary text
editor.

2) White space (blanks, tabs, or new-lines) separates control inputs
in the control file.  A control input consists of a control identifier
followed by an equal sign, followed by control parameters separated by
semicolons.  (Recommendation: put one token on a line, so the result
is easy to ready and modify.)

3) Following is an example of a control input describing a service to
be tested:

service=echo;multics;10.0.0.6

The first parameter, "echo" in that example, could be replaced by
"domain", "name", "rvd", "time", "time1", or "time2".  (The use of
"time1" and "time2" is explained in point 4, below.)  The second
parameter is the name to be displayed of the host that runs the
service to be tested.  This name must be eleven or fewer characters in
length.  The third parameter, containing the internet address of that
host, is optional.  If absent, PC/monitor uses the customized name
services to resolve the displayed name.  If present, it can be in
either octal form (with commas) or decimal form (with decimal points).

4) The display limits the number of services of any one type to 20;
the service types "time", "time1", and "time2" place the result of a
time test in three different columns of the display, and thus increase
the limit on the number of time services to 60.)

5) To comment out a token, insert the letter # as the first character.

6)  The time between passes through the service test is normally 60
seconds.  This time can be changed by a control line of the form

pause=15

where the number of seconds to pause is an integer less than 65535.

7) Name service tests are performed by sending a request for the
name provided in a control line of the form

nametest=multics.mit.edu;10.0.0.6

Where the name must be fewer than 30 characters in length.  (But for a
domain name test, it must be a complete domain name.)  For checking
the correctness of a domain name server, the corresponding internet
address may be given in either decimal form (with periods) or octal
form (with commas).

If no nametest control line is provided, PC/monitor uses the default
name "athena.athena.mit.edu" and looks for the response 18.58.0.1.

8)  After processing the input file, PC/monitor pauses for five seconds,
to permit review of any non-fatal warning messages that occurred during
that processing.


Summary of user requests accepted by PC/monitor:

     q     ("quit") Exit to DOS

     g     ("go") Start another round of tests.

     c     ("clear") Redisplay the screen contents, in case they have
	   been messed up by an error message.

 space     ("acknowledge") Change all current blinking intense fields
	   to blinking normal.


Summary of display modes and their meanings:

 normal			Latest test of this service was successful.

 intense		Latest test of this service failed; previous
			one was successful.

 intense blinking	Two or more tests in succession failed.

 normal blinking	space bar hit since two or more failed.

 underlined (blue)	service responded, but with wrong answer.

 inverse video		trouble encountered in trying to do this test.


Bugs:

1.  RVD service availability should be tested by sending
server-status-request packets, not shutdown requests.

2.  If more than 20 services of one type appear in the control file,
PC/monitor muddles the display rather than reporting an error.

3.  After several hours of operation, catastrophic errors begin to
appear, first muddling the display, and then crashing the monitor.


Customization:

The following parameters of PC/monitor can be customized with the
custom command:

    1)  Internet addresses of up to five name servers.  The 
	name servers are used to resolve those names found in the
	control file that are not accompanied with internet
	addresses.


file: monitor.txt  Last updated 1/7/86.
